this is a 1992
mercedes-benz 500 e
and it looks like every other
mercedes-benz e-class from its era
except
this one has a secret it was built by
porsche yes that's right if you think
the panamera was the first sedan porsche
built you're wrong
they also built a mercedes sedan in the
1990s and it was the 500 e and today
i'm going to review this one
[Music]
i've borrowed this 500 e from elite
finish which is a shop here in san diego
that does pretty much anything cosmetic
that you can think of detailing tints
ceramic coating clear bras wraps
basically anything elite finish has a
great reputation here in san diego and
they get some of the coolest cars and
that includes
this the story of the 500e is quite an
interesting one mercedes-benz wanted to
stick the 5-liter v8 from the sl sports
car into the e-class now that was a big
deal at the time because there was no
factory mercedes amg cars no one was
putting v8 engines into mid-size sedans
especially ones that typically came with
a four-cylinder or a six-cylinder or a
smaller diesel engine
like this era of the e-class at the same
time in the early 1990s porsche was
teetering near collapse with poor sales
and serious financial difficulties
so mercedes-benz hired porsche to
engineer a way to get the v8 into the
e-class sedan giving porsche some work
when they desperately needed it the
result was the 500 e and when it was
completed they discovered it was too
wide to be built on the same
mercedes-benz assembly line with the
other e-class models so mercedes-benz
also hired porsche to build the 500e
which helped save porsche from
bankruptcy in the early 1990s and so
this is a sedan that was built by
porsche even though it has a mercedes
badge now it was sold here in north
america from 1992 to 1994 and the 5
liter v8 made about 320 horsepower which
was more than the bmw m5 from the time
period so today i'm going to take you on
a tour of the 500e and i'm going to show
you all of its interesting quirks and
features and by the way this 500e is for
sale click the link below to check out
the owner's instagram page and you can
follow him or message him directly if
you're interested in buying it
all right i'm going to start the quirks
and features of the 500e with one of
this car's most memorable quirks and
that would be
the flared fenders now this was always
intended to be a low volume car and so
mercedes didn't want to go to the
trouble of figuring out how to stuff
this big v8 under the hood of a car that
was never intended for it so
mercedes-benz brought on porsche for the
engineering and porsche figured out a
way to get the v8 under there but it
meant they had to flare out the fenders
a couple extra inches in order to
accommodate it now the story goes that
the result of these wider fenders to
accommodate the v8 was that the car
became too wide for mercedes-benz to
build it on the normal e-class assembly
line and so porsche also decided to
build the 500e for mercedes-benz and
that's how it happened but either way
the wider fenders are important because
it is the only way you can tell on the
outside of this car
that this was different from your
regular typical e-class you're driving
along you saw one of these and unless
you knew that extra inch or two on the
fenders you just thought you were coming
up to an e220
diesel
until the light turned green now of
course there was one more way you could
tell apart the 500 e from the standard
e-class at the time and that was the
badge on the trunk that said 500 e with
500 of course standing for the 5-liter
v8 but that was it otherwise this car
was dramatically more subtle than the
bmw m5 from this era which used a six
cylinder and this car was more powerful
now next up when you get under the hood
in the 500e you can really tell why it
was such a challenge to get this engine
in here and why mercedes-benz needed
some outside help to make it happen this
v8 is really stuffed into this engine
bay and it really takes up basically
every inch of available space although
it became common later for e-class
models to have a v8 the w124 as this
generation of e-class was called it was
a pretty narrow car and it really was
never intended to have eight cylinders
when it was first designed and next up
since i'm on the outside of the 500e i
want to discuss another interesting
quirk and that would be
the mirrors and specifically the fact
that the driver mirrors this fairly
normal horizontal looking mirror but the
passenger mirror is different it's
vertical now this isn't a mistake these
mirrors were different shapes to give
you different views the driver's side
mirror was shaped like this to let you
see what was on the driver's side the
passenger side mirror was taller because
it was thought that that gave you a
better view of the passenger side blind
spot and so all e-class models from this
era have these two differently sized
mirrors very unusual you don't see that
today but when it came to mirrors this
car had an even quirkier quirk than them
being different sizes and that was how
the mirrors were adjusted all right
check this out you want to adjust the
driver mirror there's this little handle
coming off the mirror on the driver's
side and you move it around that's
pretty simple nothing unusual there but
if you want to adjust the passenger
mirror there's a little joystick in the
center console you move that around and
the passenger mirror automatically
adjusts so
while your car has power mirrors the
500e had
power mirror
singular now that's interesting but
there is an even quirkier item in the
center console than the single power
mirror adjuster and that would be
the phone open up the center console
storage area and there is a phone in
here and it dials i have been in a lot
of cars that had built-in car phones
they never work but this one dials
unfortunately it also doesn't work but
it's closer than all the other phones
i've ever seen installed in cars it will
actually dial and make the little
beeping sounds which almost seems like
it works now next up amazingly there was
an even quirkier phone related item
inside this car than the actual phone
and that would be this little panel
above the rear view mirror on the
ceiling it was a phone shortcut panel
you can see there are buttons m1 and m2
that was your memory you would set
memory 1 that was your spouse and then
you could just press m1 without having
to dial the full number press send and
it would call so this was an easier way
to dial commonly dialed numbers from
your phone without actually having to go
in and dial each individual number this
panel also had a couple of other
interesting items aside from those
memory call buttons you had an end
button up here so you could end a call
without having to reach down to your
phone in the center console you also
have this little screen here which i
think showed you how long you've been on
the call if you have service that kind
of thing and there was a little
microphone in this panel and i guess
that's where you talked into to speak on
your phone now as cool as this phone is
and as cool as it probably was in
1992 to have a car phone in here there
was a serious problem with this phone
specifically the fact that it took up
the entire center console now i say
that's a problem because this car
doesn't have a glove box so instead they
gave you the center console storage area
with this sliding back lid and a key
lock but then if you got the car phone
your center console storage area was
taken up too so there was nowhere to put
anything you had a mid-size regular
sedan with no storage you couldn't even
find a slot for your registration papers
which was kind of an issue and next up i
want to move on to some other
interesting interior quirks and features
i'm going to stay in the center console
where you have a little plastic switch
between the window switches and if you
flip it it reveals a little man
now when you have the windows in little
man reveal mode then the rear passengers
cannot roll down their windows so i
guess that's the child window lock i
personally just like the little man
graphic now next up also in that center
console area another unfamiliar piece
down there there's a little dial between
the window switches that dial would
allow you to choose where you wanted the
music balance coming out of the speaker
so if you push it all the way up you
would just hear the music out of the
front speakers and if you pushed it all
the way back then you would just hear
the music out of the rear speakers or
you could leave it in the middle and it
would sort of balance between both now
next up another interesting item this
car had quite a few rather unusual
buttons i'm gonna go through them now in
the center control stack probably the
most unusual is this button with a donut
on it that is the snow chains button and
i guess when you put snow chains on this
car you would press that button to let
the car know and then it would kind of
change its driving characteristics to be
compatible with your snow chains so that
is not a sugar doughnut on that button
that is in fact a snow tire but that's
not the only unusual button how about
the one over on the left with a seat on
it you press that and it drops the rear
headrests automatically that gave you
more visibility in case there were no
rear passengers unfortunately you can't
press that button to lift the headrests
back up if you want the headrest back up
you have to manually go back there and
actually pull them into place this
button only dropped them you also have a
button up here to control the rear
sunshade yes this car had a rear
sunshade you press this button and then
the sunshade would whirr into place
thereby creating a little shade for the
rear passengers now next up another
interesting item in the center control
stack was the climate controls and
specifically the fact that they operate
like a whack-a-mole game check this out
if you press the button to choose where
you want the air to come out then the
previous button pops up and you can just
keep pressing buttons and popping up
previous buttons it's an interesting way
to allow the front passengers to choose
where the air is coming out now next up
another unusual climate control is over
on the left and that would be this dial
that allows you to select the air
temperature right now it's blue so it's
going to be blowing out cold air but if
you adjust the dial you can get it to
white which is i guess medium air and
then eventually to red which is warm air
kind of a strange way to change the air
temperature by modern standards one
other unusual thing about the climate
controls is the fact that you have only
three different fan speeds so over on
the right and you have low fan speed you
have high fan speed and then you have
automatic fan speed automatic climate
control that's it there's no dial to
adjust your fan speed exactly to your
liking you just have to go with one of
these options now aside from all the
interesting quirks and features in this
car it's worth noting that this car was
pretty advanced for 1992 it had quite a
few
modern luxuries and conveniences for
instance it had dual airbags an airbag
on the driver's side and on the
passenger side not too many cars had
that in 1992. it also had power seats
which is pretty good but that included a
power headrest you press this little
button in the power seat controls and
the headrest would automatically move up
and down
pretty nice luxury touch and you had
heated seats these little buttons in the
center console would turn on two
different stages of heated seats and
next up we move on to the back seats in
the 500e you open the back door and the
very first thing you notice is
this little storage cubby the back seats
have a storage cubby between the seat
and the door where they can stick stuff
now the front seats they don't have a
glove box and the center console is
taken by the phone but the rear seat
passengers they have some storage
options now the next thing you notice
back here right away is that there are
only two back seats this is not a bench
seat you have bucket seats back here and
in the center you have a large center
console so this is only a four-seater
car
just like the original panamera which
was kind of an interesting thing now of
course you're probably wondering what
exactly takes up that space where the
middle seat would have been where the
middle seat was in all the other e-class
models from this era and the answer is
well for one thing there's storage if
you roll back this wood panel you can
see there's a nice little storage
compartment in the middle between the
seats or you go to the seat back in the
center and you can drop down this nice
armrest to increase the comfort of the
rear seat passengers or in the front of
this center console you have an ashtray
which is nice if you want to smoke in
back although it's worth noting there is
also an ashtray on the door on the
driver's side and another ashtray on the
door on the passenger side meaning there
are three ashtrays back here for two
rear seats and these are the rear seats
this is where your children will be but
fortunately if your children take up
smoking they have many places to discard
their ashes another interesting item
back here is the coat hanger or the grab
handle which is like twice the size of
the one in front you can see it's much
larger longer in the back than it is in
the front i guess so you could stick
even more coats in the back and next up
the other interesting item in the back
seats would be the first aid kit you may
be wondering where that's located well
that's on the rear shelf of course you
can pop it open and experience all the
best in 27 year old
first aid supplies now speaking of that
first aid kit on the rear parcel shelf
another interesting item on that parcel
shelf is the third brake light you can
see it from inside it looks like they
just tacked it on there and that's
because they did this car came out
before the requirement that mandated a
third brake light and then that
requirement showed up and they were like
what do we do so they just kind of
stuck one in there and that's where it
lives very much looks like an
afterthought speaking of interesting
lighting items with this car though one
unusual one in the front is the wipers
this car has windshield wipers for the
headlights not very common today but
some mercedes-benz models had it back in
the 90s and this is one of those cars
now this is made even more unusual by
the fact that there is only one
windshield wiper for the windshield it's
called the mono wiper you turn it on and
it wipes the whole windshield with just
one wiper so there were two wipers for
the headlights but only one wiper for
the actual windshield an interesting
case study in engineering priorities but
that's what they've done here and next
up another interesting item on the
outside of this car the badge on the
back i mentioned before that 500 e badge
pretty much the only way you can tell
this car apart from regular e-class
models it's worth noting that
mercedes-benz changed all their model
names in 1994
to put the letter first instead of the
numbers that was during this car's
production run so the early 500e models
are called 500e but beginning in 94 it
was called the e 500 just kind of
depends on what model year your 500 e
500 is from now speaking of the back of
the car let's talk trunk for a minute
you open the trunk and you will find
that it is
a trunk nothing at all unusual
interesting special in here except for
the fact that it includes a cd changer
this was a factory original cd changer
included with this car and again pretty
forward thinking for 1992 almost all
cars in 92 didn't even have a cd player
this thing had a changer in the trunk
you bought this car you were getting a
lot of cool stuff and so those are the
quirks and features of the mercedes 500
e
now it's time to get it out on the road
and see how it drives all right driving
the 500 e now one interesting thing
about the 500 e specifically with me
reviewing it i actually owned a
e 1993
for a little while it was in really nice
shape not quite as nice as this and then
i kind of flipped it as they were going
up in value and that's one of the things
about this car it is going up in value
just like basically anything that has
porsche on it uh this car is kind of
seen as a bit of a porsche and so values
have started to really climb as porsches
have become more collectible nice
examples of 500es are now selling for 30
40 50 plus thousand dollars really low
mileage ones even higher than that one
thing i always didn't like about the
500e was the seats they are laughably
unsupportive um for a performance car
it's almost hilarious and stupid they
are flat basically they're comfortable
um but this was intended to be a
performance car and you just kind of
slide around in corners as for the
performance of this car i have owned an
embarrassing number of high-performance
e-class models i had the 500e then i had
the e55 that came out next uh then the
e63 that came out after that and then
the e63 that came out after that i'm on
my fourth high performance e-class right
now um and this car i always thought was
a good example of how a dynasty kind of
starts which is to say it was good but
it was not fully refined so when you
floor it
it's pretty quick for a car from this
era this thing hauls 320 330 horsepower
to v8 a car this size not all sorts of
modern gadgets and equipment to make it
heavy this car went pretty well now it
had a four-speed automatic it was not
the greatest transmission for that stuff
it didn't handle tremendously well uh
e-class models got far far more athletic
right after this one but especially up
to the modern era now they're like
sports cars this thing was better than a
regular e-class but not dramatically
it was not particularly sharp not
particularly precise it was just fine
basically what they did was they had
this idea to stick a v8 in an e-class
see what happened
and it worked pretty well and so the
next one they refined it more they went
with a sportier engine they did a few
more styling cues they did more to the
suspension and over the years they've
just been refining it but this car
wasn't that this was not
the final evolution it was just sort of
the beginning as a result of that i've
been watching the values in these cars
climb and i've been kind of puzzled by
it um it's just not the world's greatest
driving car and if it wasn't for the
fact that it was built
in zuffenhausen instead of eight miles
away
uh where mercedes was building the
e-classes this car wouldn't be that
valuable and so by modern standards it's
not the most fun car to drive the fun of
this car comes more in the story the
porsche connection
um and just kind of you know the special
if you know you know with the flared
fenders and the low production number
now that's not to say this is not a good
car the era of
mercedes-benz when this car came out was
probably the peak of mercedes-benz
quality um
very very
sturdy solid cars and this vehicle feels
like that and so
that's the mercedes 500 e
this may look like a regular 1990s
e-class but it's a far more special car
than that and while i personally think
that the e55 amg that came next was a
far better high performance e-class you
have to respect this car and its crazy
story sticking a v8 into a midsize sedan
that was built just yards from where
porsche was putting together the iconic
911. anyway that's the 500 e and now
it's time to give it a doug score
starting with the weekend categories and
styling the 500e looks nice enough the
changes over regular models are too
subtle for most people but they're still
cool and it gets a 6 out of 10.
acceleration does 0 to 60 in 5.9 seconds
and it gets a 4 out of 10. handling is
ok i'm surprised it's not sharper
considering this car's pedigree and it
gets a 4 out of 10. fun factor is
relatively low aside from the history
and acceleration it's really just a
fairly docile mercedes sedan and it gets
a 4 out of 10. cool factor is ok most
people won't know what it is but some do
and they'll think it's really cool it
gets a 6 out of 10 for a total weekend
score of 24 out of 50. next up are the
daily categories and features it was
reasonably well equipped for its time
and it gets a 3 out of 10. comfort is
only ok a little better than average and
it gets a 6 out of 10. quality is strong
this is a tremendously reliable engine
but also the car is just solidly built
the only drawback is somewhat average
interior materials by modern standards
and it gets an 8 out of 10. practicality
is normal for a car like this and it
gets a 5 out of 10. value is good 5
years ago i would have given an 8 or a 9
but 500 e prices are rising and now it's
down to a 6 out of 10 for a total daily
score of 28 out of 50. added up in the
dug score is 52 out of 100 i've never
reviewed any close competitors to the
500e but here it is against a few
somewhat similar cars from its era the
500e is an excellent sedan with a
special history and i bet nice ones like
this will continue to increase in value
and collector interest
[Music]